# Modeling the dynamic of Tuberculosis in Kiribati
The project aims to modeling the dynmic of Tuberculosis in Kiribati. The concept based on the state-of-the-art compartmental model with parameters, which was published by [Ragonnet el al.](https://academic.oup.com/ije/advance-article/doi/10.1093/ije/dyac045/6552193).
## 1. Background
Tuberculosis (TB, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB)) is a leading infectious disease in Pacific. At the 2020 census, around 59% of the i- Kiribati population lived on the capital atoll of Tarawa.16 Of all TB cases detected in Kiribati in 2020, 69% (267 of 385) were from Tarawa—equating to an estimated TB incidence of >500/100 000 population, the threshold incidence level above which the WHO recommends population- wide screening interventions. MTB strain typing data and the dominance of young adults among TB cases indicate high levels of community transmission, which emphasizes the need for case finding and prevention strategies to be combined in order to prevent rapid reinfection. South Tarawa accommodates ~59% of the i- Kiribati population and has the highest rates of TB.
A non- randomised ‘screen and- treat’ intervention conducted in the Pacific atoll of South Tarawa, Kiribati. Households are enumerated and all residents ≥3 years, as well as children <3 years with recent household exposure to TB or leprosy, invited for screening.
## 2. Objective
-	Analyzing the current epidemiology in Kiribati (Including spatial analysis if applicable)
-	Modeling the long-term impact of intervention in Kiribati.
## 3. Methods
Use the same methods with Marshall Islands model of Ragonnet et al. A deterministic transmission model of TB informed by local data to capture the Marshall Islands epidemic’s historical dynamics was developed. Then the model was used to project the future epidemic trajectory following the active screening interventions, as well as considering a counterfactual scenario with no intervention. Future scenarios including periodic interventions like those previously implemented, to assess their ability to reach the End TB Strategy targets in the Kiribati also simulated.
The base model consisted of six compartments representing particular clinical statuses regarding M.tb infection or disease. LTBI was modelled using two sequential compartments (E and L) to capture the declining risk of disease progression over time from infection.15 Individuals progressing to active TB (I) were classified based on their form of disease: smear-positive pulmonary TB, smear-negative pulmonary TB, and extrapulmonary TB. The simulated population was stratified by age and location (South Tarawa, and all other islands of the Kiribati) and we allowed inter-island mixing. In the base-case analysis we assumed that 95% of interpersonal contacts occur between individuals of the same island group, whereas this proportion was reduced to 80% in a sensitivity analysis. The model captured the effect of type 2 diabetes on the risk of TB progression, accounting for the increase in diabetes prevalence over recent decades.
BCG vaccination was incorporated through a time-variant and age-specific process reducing the risk of infection (base-case analysis) or reducing the severity of TB (sensitivity analysis. We fitted model parameters using local data on population size, TB prevalence, LTBI prevalence and TB notifications, while considering uncertainty around the most critical model parameters.
Data sources: Programmatic data (Case notification, incidence, prevalence of TB and comorbidity in Kiribati), census survey. If data is unavailable, data can be extracted from literature, database of UN and other international organizations.
Baseline data available: Case notification, incidence, prevalence, population, age structure, household sizes.


